[feat][doc] add development docs for broker load balancing (#662)
apache/pulsar-site: docs/develop-load-manager.md

---
id: develop-load-manager
title: Broker load balancer
sidebar_label: "Broker load balancer"
---

If you want to develop a broker load balancer, check out the following docs.

Pulsar has the following types of load managers:

- Simple load manager, implemented in [`SimpleLoadManagerImpl`](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/loadbalance/impl/SimpleLoadManagerImpl.java), which attempts to simplify how the load is managed while also providing abstractions so that complex load management strategies may be implemented.

- Modular load manager, implemented in [`ModularLoadManagerImpl`](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/loadbalance/impl/ModularLoadManagerImpl.java), which is a flexible alternative to the [`SimpleLoadManagerImpl`](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/loadbalance/impl/SimpleLoadManagerImpl.java).

> - Extensible load manager, implemented in 

Author: @Demogorgon314 as we discussed just now, can you provide technical input for this?

threshold, that broker is not considered for bundle assignment. If all brokers are overloaded, the bundle is randomly
assigned.

## Enablement

You can enable a simple, modular, or extensible load manager by following the steps below.

### Enable simple load manager

You can enable the simple load manager using one of the following methods: 

- Method 1

  Update the value of [loadManagerClassName](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/782e91fe327efe2c9c9107d6c679c2837d43935b/conf/broker.conf#L1309) to `org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.SimpleLoadManagerImpl` in `conf/broker.conf`.

- Method 2
  
  Use the `pulsar-admin` tool. 

   ```shell
   pulsar-admin brokers update-dynamic-config \
   --config loadManagerClassName \
   --value org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.SimpleLoadManagerImpl
   ``` 

  :::note 
  

>   Any mistakes in specifying the load manager will cause Pulsar to default to `SimpleLoadManagerImpl`.

Reviewer: Out of curiosity, do you mean if users do not configure the load manager type correctly, Pulsar will use `SimpleLoadManagerImpl`?

Author: yes

>   :::

Author: @Demogorgon314 is this note correct here?

Reviewer 2: The default load manager is `ModularLoadManagerImpl` if not set `broker.conf`

Author: OK

### Enable modular load manager

You can enable the modular load manager using one of the following methods: 

- Method 1

  Update the value of [loadManagerClassName](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/782e91fe327efe2c9c9107d6c679c2837d43935b/conf/broker.conf#L1309) to `org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.ModularLoadManagerImpl` in `conf/broker.conf`.

- Method 2
  
  Use the `pulsar-admin` tool. 

   ```shell
   pulsar-admin brokers update-dynamic-config \
   --config loadManagerClassName \
   --value org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.ModularLoadManagerImpl
   ```

  :::note 
  
  Any mistakes in specifying the load manager will cause Pulsar to default to `SimpleLoadManagerImpl`.

  :::

### Enable extensible load manager

You can enable the extensible load manager by updating the value of [loadManagerClassName](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/782e91fe327efe2c9c9107d6c679c2837d43935b/conf/broker.conf#L1309) to `org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.ExtensibleLoadManagerImpl` in `conf/broker.conf`.

:::note

> The pulsar-admin tool is not supported for enabling the extensible load manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pulsar-admin` tool is unsupported for enabling the extensible load manager.
```

> :::

Author: @Demogorgon314 is this note correct here? As same to https://github.com/apache/pulsar-site/pull/657/files#diff-2abdb541a434c7250793845da41718b322344e45cc83098c3c57addacc4b5a6aR83-R85

Reviewer 2: Yes, is corrected.

## Verification

If you want to verify which load manager is used, follow the steps below.

### Step 1: check loadManagerClassName

You can use the `pulsar-admin` tool to examine the `loadManagerClassName` element.

**Input**

```bash
bin/pulsar-admin brokers get-all-dynamic-config
```

**Output**

```bash
{
"loadManagerClassName" : "org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.ModularLoadManagerImpl"
}
```

If there is no `loadManagerClassName` element, then the value of [loadManagerClassName](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/782e91fe327efe2c9c9107d6c679c2837d43935b/conf/broker.conf#L1309) in the `conf/broker.conf` file is used.

### Step 2: verify load manager (optional) 

To double-check which load manager is used, you can [check the ZooKeeper load report](#method-1-check-zookeeper-load-report) or [check monitor-brokers output](#method-2-check-monitor-brokers-output).  

#### Method 1: check ZooKeeper load report

Check the ZooKeeper load report. The load report in `/loadbalance/brokers/...`.

```bash

> tbd

Author: @Demogorgon314 as we discussed just now, can you provide technical input for this?

Reviewer 2: Input:
```bash
bin/pulsar zookeeper-shell -server zookeeper:2181
```

Output
```
Connecting to zookeeper:2181
2023-08-02T12:48:58,655+0000 [main] INFO  org.apache.zookeeper.ZooKeeper - Client environment:zookeeper.version=3.8.1-74db005175a4ec545697012f9069cb9dcc8cdda7, built on 2023-01-25 16:31 UTC
2023-08-02T12:48:58,662+0000 [main] INFO  org.apache.zookeeper.ZooKeeper - Client environment:host.name=broker-1
2023-08-02T12:48:58,662+0000 [main] INFO  org.apache.zookeeper.ZooKeeper - Client environment:java.version=17.0.7
2023-08-02T12:48:58,662+0000 [main] INFO  org.apache.zookeeper.ZooKeeper - Client environment:java.vendor=Eclipse Adoptium
2023-08-02T12:48:58,662+0000 [main] INFO  org.apache.zookeeper.ZooKeeper - Client environment:java.home=/usr/lib/jvm/temurin-17-jdk-amd64
```

The above cmd will enter the zookeeper shell.

```bash
[zk: zookeeper:2181(CONNECTED) 0] ls /loadbalance/brokers
[broker-1:8080, broker-2:8080]
[zk: zookeeper:2181(CONNECTED) 1] get /loadbalance/brokers/broker-1:8080
{"webServiceUrl":"http://broker-1:8080","pulsarServiceUrl":"pulsar://broker-1:6650","persistentTopicsEnabled":true,"nonPersistentTopicsEnabled":true,"cpu":{"usage":7.311714728372232,"limit":800.0},"memory":{"usage":124.0,"limit":2096.0},"directMemory":{"usage":36.0,"limit":256.0},"bandwidthIn":{"usage":0.8324254085661579,"limit":1.0E7},"bandwidthOut":{"usage":0.7155446715644209,"limit":1.0E7},"msgThroughputIn":0.0,"msgThroughputOut":0.0,"msgRateIn":0.0,"msgRateOut":0.0,"lastUpdate":1690979816792,"lastStats":{"my-tenant/my-namespace/0x4ccccccb_0x66666664":{"msgRateIn":0.0,"msgThroughputIn":0.0,"msgRateOut":0.0,"msgThroughputOut":0.0,"consumerCount":2,"producerCount":0,"topics":1,"cacheSize":0}},"numTopics":1,"numBundles":1,"numConsumers":2,"numProducers":0,"bundles":["my-tenant/my-namespace/0x4ccccccb_0x66666664"],"lastBundleGains":[],"lastBundleLosses":[],"brokerVersionString":"3.1.0-SNAPSHOT","protocols":{},"advertisedListeners":{"internal":{"brokerServiceUrl":"pulsar://broker-1:6650"}},"loadManagerClassName":"org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.ModularLoadManagerImpl","startTimestamp":1690940955211,"maxResourceUsage":0.140625,"loadReportType":"LocalBrokerData"}
```

Author: @Demogorgon314 the above is for modular, please provide a simple

Reviewer 2: SimpleLoadManagerImpl:
```
[zk: zookeeper:2181(CONNECTED) 0] ls /loadbalance/brokers
[broker-1:8080, broker-2:8080]
[zk: zookeeper:2181(CONNECTED) 1] get /loadbalance/brokers/broker-1:8080
{"name":"broker-1:8080","brokerVersionString":"3.1.0-SNAPSHOT","webServiceUrl":"http://broker-1:8080","pulsarServiceUrl":"pulsar://broker-1:6650","persistentTopicsEnabled":true,"nonPersistentTopicsEnabled":true,"timestamp":1691042931108,"msgRateIn":0.0,"msgRateOut":0.0,"numTopics":0,"numConsumers":0,"numProducers":0,"numBundles":0,"protocols":{},"loadManagerClassName":"org.apache.pulsar.broker.loadbalance.impl.SimpleLoadManagerImpl","startTimestamp":1691042931108,"systemResourceUsage":{"bandwidthIn":{"usage":0.595387281695773,"limit":1.0E7},"bandwidthOut":{"usage":0.5799226769764033,"limit":1.0E7},"cpu":{"usage":6.224803359552059,"limit":800.0},"memory":{"usage":152.0,"limit":2096.0},"directMemory":{"usage":0.0,"limit":256.0}},"bundleStats":{},"bundleGains":[],"bundleLosses":[],"allocatedCPU":0.0,"allocatedMemory":0.0,"allocatedBandwidthIn":0.0,"allocatedBandwidthOut":0.0,"allocatedMsgRateIn":0.0,"allocatedMsgRateOut":0.0,"preAllocatedCPU":0.0,"preAllocatedMemory":0.0,"preAllocatedBandwidthIn":0.0,"preAllocatedBandwidthOut":0.0,"preAllocatedMsgRateIn":0.0,"preAllocatedMsgRateOut":0.0,"underLoaded":true,"overLoaded":false,"loadReportType":"LoadReport","msgThroughputIn":0.0,"msgThroughputOut":0.0,"bandwidthIn":{"usage":0.595387281695773,"limit":1.0E7},"bandwidthOut":{"usage":0.5799226769764033,"limit":1.0E7},"memory":{"usage":152.0,"limit":2096.0},"cpu":{"usage":6.224803359552059,"limit":800.0},"directMemory":{"usage":0.0,"limit":256.0},"lastUpdate":1691042931108}
```

        "limit": 10240000.0,
        "usage": 0.0
      },
      "cpu": {
        "limit": 2400.0,
        "usage": 0.0
      },
      "directMemory": {
        "limit": 16384.0,
        "usage": 1.0
      },
      "memory": {
        "limit": 8192.0,
        "usage": 3903.0
      }
    }
  }
  ```

- [Modular load manager](./concepts-broker-load-balancing-types.md)

   Modular load manager has different ZooKeeper load report from that of the simple load manager. For example, the `systemResourceUsage` sub-elements (`bandwidthIn`, `bandwidthOut`, etc.) are now all at the top level. 

  ```json
  {
    "bandwidthIn": {
      "limit": 10240000.0,
      "usage": 4.256510416666667
    },
    "bandwidthOut": {
      "limit": 10240000.0,
      "usage": 5.287239583333333
    },
    "bundles": [],
    "cpu": {
      "limit": 2400.0,
      "usage": 5.7353247655435915
    },
    "directMemory": {
      "limit": 16384.0,
      "usage": 1.0
    }
  }
  ```

- Extensible load manager

  :::note

  [Extensible load manager](./concepts-broker-load-balancing-types.md) does not have the ZooKeepr load report because its internal stats are stored in system topics rather than ZooKeeper.

>   :::

Author: @Demogorgon314 accurate?

Reviewer 2: Yes

Reviewer 3: Admins can run consumers on these topics and see the load report.

Author: @Demogorgon314 will test and try to give an extensible output example

Reviewer 2: Input:
```bash
bin/pulsar-client consume non-persistent://pulsar/system/loadbalancer-broker-load-data --subscription-name test
```
Output:
```
2023-08-03T06:21:48,841+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-3] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConnectionPool - [[id: 0x69a65535, L:/127.0.0.1:59086 - R:localhost/127.0.0.1:6650]] Connected to server
2023-08-03T06:21:48,926+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-3] WARN  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConsumerImpl - [non-persistent://pulsar/system/loadbalancer-broker-load-data] Cannot create a [Durable] subscription for a NonPersistentTopic, will use [NonDurable] to subscribe. Subscription name: test
2023-08-03T06:21:49,189+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-3] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConsumerStatsRecorderImpl - Starting Pulsar consumer status recorder with config: {"topicNames":["non-persistent://pulsar/system/loadbalancer-broker-load-data"],"topicsPattern":null,"subscriptionName":"test","subscriptionType":"Exclusive","subscriptionProperties":null,"subscriptionMode":"NonDurable","receiverQueueSize":1000,"acknowledgementsGroupTimeMicros":100000,"maxAcknowledgmentGroupSize":1000,"negativeAckRedeliveryDelayMicros":60000000,"maxTotalReceiverQueueSizeAcrossPartitions":50000,"consumerName":null,"ackTimeoutMillis":0,"tickDurationMillis":1000,"priorityLevel":0,"maxPendingChunkedMessage":10,"autoAckOldestChunkedMessageOnQueueFull":false,"expireTimeOfIncompleteChunkedMessageMillis":60000,"cryptoFailureAction":"FAIL","properties":{},"readCompacted":false,"subscriptionInitialPosition":"Latest","patternAutoDiscoveryPeriod":60,"regexSubscriptionMode":"PersistentOnly","deadLetterPolicy":null,"retryEnable":false,"autoUpdatePartitions":true,"autoUpdatePartitionsIntervalSeconds":60,"replicateSubscriptionState":false,"resetIncludeHead":false,"batchIndexAckEnabled":false,"ackReceiptEnabled":false,"poolMessages":true,"startPaused":false,"autoScaledReceiverQueueSizeEnabled":false,"topicConfigurations":[],"maxPendingChuckedMessage":10}
2023-08-03T06:21:49,214+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-3] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConsumerStatsRecorderImpl - Pulsar client config: {"serviceUrl":"pulsar://localhost:6650/","authPluginClassName":null,"authParams":null,"authParamMap":null,"operationTimeoutMs":30000,"lookupTimeoutMs":30000,"statsIntervalSeconds":60,"numIoThreads":8,"numListenerThreads":8,"connectionsPerBroker":1,"connectionMaxIdleSeconds":180,"useTcpNoDelay":true,"useTls":false,"tlsKeyFilePath":"","tlsCertificateFilePath":"","tlsTrustCertsFilePath":"","tlsAllowInsecureConnection":false,"tlsHostnameVerificationEnable":false,"concurrentLookupRequest":5000,"maxLookupRequest":50000,"maxLookupRedirects":20,"maxNumberOfRejectedRequestPerConnection":50,"keepAliveIntervalSeconds":30,"connectionTimeoutMs":10000,"requestTimeoutMs":60000,"readTimeoutMs":60000,"autoCertRefreshSeconds":300,"initialBackoffIntervalNanos":100000000,"maxBackoffIntervalNanos":60000000000,"enableBusyWait":false,"listenerName":null,"useKeyStoreTls":false,"sslProvider":null,"tlsKeyStoreType":"JKS","tlsKeyStorePath":"","tlsKeyStorePassword":"*****","tlsTrustStoreType":"JKS","tlsTrustStorePath":"","tlsTrustStorePassword":"*****","tlsCiphers":[],"tlsProtocols":[],"memoryLimitBytes":0,"proxyServiceUrl":null,"proxyProtocol":null,"enableTransaction":false,"dnsLookupBindAddress":null,"dnsLookupBindPort":0,"socks5ProxyAddress":null,"socks5ProxyUsername":null,"socks5ProxyPassword":null,"description":null}
2023-08-03T06:21:49,236+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-5] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConnectionPool - [[id: 0xbeee21f2, L:/172.31.0.4:44850 - R:broker-1/172.31.0.4:6650]] Connected to server
2023-08-03T06:21:49,241+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-5] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConsumerImpl - [non-persistent://pulsar/system/loadbalancer-broker-load-data][test] Subscribing to topic on cnx [id: 0xbeee21f2, L:/172.31.0.4:44850 - R:broker-1/172.31.0.4:6650], consumerId 0
2023-08-03T06:21:49,273+0000 [pulsar-client-io-1-5] INFO  org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.ConsumerImpl - [non-persistent://pulsar/system/loadbalancer-broker-load-data][test] Subscribed to topic on broker-1/172.31.0.4:6650 -- consumer: 0
----- got message -----
key:[broker-1:8080], properties:[], content:{"cpu":{"usage":14.397985201479854,"limit":800.0},"memory":{"usage":300.0,"limit":2096.0},"directMemory":{"usage":40.0,"limit":256.0},"bandwidthIn":{"usage":0.7817884878178855,"limit":1.0E7},"bandwidthOut":{"usage":0.7213945272139455,"limit":1.0E7},"msgThroughputIn":3.000538680274058,"msgThroughputOut":3.0005621893825616,"msgRateIn":0.03333931866971176,"msgRateOut":0.033339579882028465,"bundleCount":3,"topics":3,"maxResourceUsage":0.15625,"weightedMaxEMA":0.15625,"msgThroughputEMA":38.88925615962549,"updatedAt":1691043751060,"reportedAt":1691043631073}
```

  ||COUNT          |TOPIC          |BUNDLE         |PRODUCER       |CONSUMER       |BUNDLE +       |BUNDLE -       ||
  ||               |4              |4              |0              |2              |4              |0              ||
  ||LATEST         |MSG/S IN       |MSG/S OUT      |TOTAL          |KB/S IN        |KB/S OUT       |TOTAL          ||
  ||               |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           ||
  ||SHORT          |MSG/S IN       |MSG/S OUT      |TOTAL          |KB/S IN        |KB/S OUT       |TOTAL          ||
  ||               |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           ||
  ||LONG           |MSG/S IN       |MSG/S OUT      |TOTAL          |KB/S IN        |KB/S OUT       |TOTAL          ||
  ||               |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           |0.00           ||
  ===================================================================================================================
  ```

 - Extensible load manager
   
   ```bash

>    tbd

Author: @Demogorgon314 as we discussed just now, can you provide technical input for this?

Reviewer 2: BTW, the extensible load manager should use the following command:
```
bin/pulsar-perf monitor-brokers --connect-string pulsar://localhost:6650 --extensions
```
